established in sentence planning (see the next
section) .
Building the text plan proceeds in two steps: First, a set of rules tries, bottom-up, to establish rhetorical relations between individual propositions and then recursively between the resulted trees of depth one; then, another set of rules link the set of small trees together into a complete tree (top-down). In both stages, we first try to establish "informative" relations, and only if this fails, the relatively "weak" relations ELABORATION or, worse, JOINT are established. Altogether, we currently use these rhetorical relations: CAUSE, CONCESSION, CONTRAST, ELABORATION, JOINT, LIST, RESULT. Examples of the bottom-up stage:
•	If there is exactly one proposition with positive evaluation and exactly one with a neg-
ative evaluation, they are combined into a CONCESSION tree. E.g.: Although the book is rather old, it covers all the topics you are interested in. If there are more positive or negative propositions, these are combined first, in order to avoid multiple concessions within the same paragraph.
•	When a "(RECOMMEND book)" proposition is present, it is linked to positively- evaluated propositions via a RESULT relation. E.g.: The book covers all the topics you are interested in. Also, it is quite recent. Therefore, it would be a good choice for you.
The operation of the top-down rules depends
on the communicative goal. For describing and
comparing, little more than arranging similar propositions into LISTs or ELABORATIONs is done. For recommending a book, however, the rules are responsible for achieving the overall rhetorical effect. How this is done depends on the configuration produced by the bottom- up rules; in general, the top-down rules have to make sure that, e.g., a "(RECOMMEND book)" proposition appears either at the beginning or the end of the paragraph, and that the paragraph does not end with a negative proposition.
4 Sentence planning
An architectural innovation of Polibox is its sep-
arating the tree of deep rhetorical relations from
a structure involving surface-oriented `conjunc-
tive relations'. The latter is constructed in sen-
tence planning and represents a level of representation at which sentence scope and structure have been fixed, but lexicalisation is still ahead.
Conjunctive relations (henceforth CR) are an approach to characterizing text connectedness developed by (Martin 1992). Martin offers a fine-grained classification of relations and the range of their realizations in English, characterized by sets of semantic features, which Martin organizes as system networks.
The groups of relations distinguished by Martin are the following: additive (addition, alternation), comparative (similarity, contrast), temporal (simultaneous, successive), consequential (purpose, condition, consequence, concession, manner). Each group is analyzed in great detail and systematically linked to realization through connectives and clause structure. Notice that there are some similarities to the relations proposed by RST (Mann, Thompson 1987); however, Martin's approach is decidedly oriented to linguistic realization, whereas RST relations were considered "prerealizational". Polibox indeed implements this distinction by employing RST in text planning and CR in sentence planning. The ordering step proceeds as follows: Propositions are treated as nodes in an (initially disconnected) graph, and the ordering information already present in the rhetorical tree provides the first directed edges. By computing similarity/contrastiveness among propositions, the remaining edges are inserted. Next, the proposition stream is "chunked" into clauses and sentences in accordance with the relations present in the rhetorical tree; the graph edges are labelled with appropriate CRs.
Introducing the CR level leads us to split the sentence planning stage in two parts: First, propositions are packaged into clause- and sentence-chunks, decisions between paratactic and hypotactic connection are made, and the class of connectives to be used is fixed. All these decisions are influenced by the communicative goal and by the discourse memory, which records the linearization in order to support subsequent ordering decisions as well as choice of clause themes.
The remaining tasks in moving from CR to sentence plans (Kasper 1989) are choosing
